It is clear that silence has power. Like any power it can be used to hurt or to heal and perhaps this is why people respondso variably to it.

For some people silence means loneliness, isolation or awkwardness. It can be used to indicate emotional withdrawal,disapproval or even punishment. In our language the word silence is often used with negative 
connotations; a conspiracyof silence, being given the silent treatment,lifting the veil of silence. In our busy, noisy world many people seem to fear silence.

Research is fairly clear that too much noise is bad for us. But does that mean that silence is good for us? Well notnecessarily, silence is more than the absence of noise. However, research is beginning to 
suggest that silence itself is beneficial both physically and psychologically.
Spending time in silence has been found to have positive effects on the body in terms of reducing blood pressure, boosting the immune system, reducing blood cortisol, promoting hormone regulation and
prevention of arterial plaque 
formation.
Psychological benefits of silence can include enhanced creativity, focus, self control, self awareness, perspective and spirituality.

Silence can be used both positively and negatively in communication, and thus can influence our relationships. Most of usclearly recognise the difference between a disapproving silence and that which is affirms that
what we are saying is being truly listened to. The use of silence in communication is also culturally bound and can mean different things in differentcontexts.

Internal Vs External Noise
In a public place very rarely do you see someone just sitting. The minute they are “alone” they check their phone, and then use it to connect to some digital input. Are we so unwilling to be alone with
ourselves and what is the level of noise in our society and the absence of silence doing to our mental health?

I have already said that silence is more than the absence of noise. Our internal chatter also contributes to the lack of silence in our lives. The constant pressure of the list of things we “need” to do in our 
heads, plus our culturally driven self evaluations often make us uncomfortable just sitting and being. Perhaps it’s no wonder we immediately check our email or social media as a distraction. This can then become 
a vicious circle as we then have even more things to attend to or compare ourselves with.
The Paradox Of Silence
Ross (2014) suggests that silence is both context and process. It is both our natural state, having being evolutionarily necessary for our survival and also a choice. The choice is to pursue a metaphorical space,
not bound by language, which allows our human constructs to fall away allowing access to our authentic self and communion between our inner and outer selves. Silence is a place of paradox which has the 
potential for the balance of dialectical conflicts and healing, allowing us to hear our heart, quiet our chaotic consciousness and achieve some inner stability. If we can learn to cooperate openly with silence 
in our lives the potential benefits to health and well-being are huge.

Routes Into Silence
As suggested above silence is not necessarily linked to the environment. Experienced meditators can achieve non reactive states of presence in even very disruptive situations. However, for most people learning
to use silence positively does involve relative quiet and various forms of meditation training, retreats and wilderness experiences have tapped into this, but accessing the power of silence does not have to cost

money. Open curiosity and the willingness to encounter yourself in silence are the most important resources. Spending time in nature can be just sitting in your garden or going for a walk. Learning to meditate can
be achieved by accessing many of the free web resources and going on retreat can be simply sitting in your local church quietly during your lunch hour. As a practicing Christian I can tell you no one will mind you
doing this and belief in God is definitely not a prerequisite for being there.

The potential healing available in silence and being with our difficult thoughts is not always pleasant or comfortable and this is one of the reasons that many people abandon meditation. Learning to use the
power of silence has wonderful potential to improve our lives and is free to all with the persistence to cultivate it.

Reference Ross, M. (2014). Silence: A User’s Guide. London: Darton, Longman & Todd Ltd.

About the author: Sarah Monk ​is a student on the MAPP course at Buckinghamshire New University. She has a degree in psychology from Southampton University and an MSc in Clinical Psychology from the University
of Surrey. She has voluntary roles with a number of charities and lives well with C.F.S.
The benefits of silence
Our lives are busy, and a few minutes of silence is a rare treat for most people. Many of us don’t get to embrace silence as much as our world has become increasingly digitized and we are more dependent on our 
devices: many of us are constantly ‘on’.


Even conversations with family members, work colleagues, kids and friends do not give us the respite we need from noise. In fact, it just adds to the mental clutter going on in our minds and creates more
frustration, anger and an imbalance in our physical and mental health.

 

“Escaping noise is a modern-day challenge but essential to our well-being: the power of silence is scientifically-proven when it comes to the benefits it can offer our minds and bodies.”
 

The obvious answer is to take a break from external noise and internal chatter and aim for some silence and solitude. But, for some people, silence can be uncomfortable and scary as they are left alone
with their worrisome thoughts, which can be stressful. For others, the fear of silence can be profound, because they are now used to a noisy world.

 

The power of silence: 10 benefits of cultivating peace
Silence is important for our health and well-being, just as exercise and nourishment are. So, what are the benefits of silence and how can the power of silence help us?

 

1. Stimulates brain growth
Two hours of solitude and silence every day could potentially rejuvenate your brain. In a 2013 study scientists exposed mice to three types of sound, including baby mouse calls. They included silence
as a control and expected baby mouse calls to stimulate development of brain cells.


To their surprise, scientists found that two hours of silence per day prompted greater healthy brain cell growth in the hippocampus – an area of the brain responsible for memory formation, learning, 
motivation and regulation of emotional responses.

 

2. Improves sleep and fights insomnia
The importance of quiet sleep cannot be stressed enough as it helps restore the body and the mind, and is important for your physical, emotional and cognitive health.


CONNECT_300X250_EN.gif

 

Periods of silence during the day can also improve sleep quality and lessen insomnia, highlighted in a 2015 study where older adults practised mindfulness meditation for six weeks.

 

3. Improves memory
Ten to 15 minutes of sitting in silence can boost your memory. The remarkable memory-boosting benefits of quiet contemplation also have positive implications for those who have a neurological injury,
such as a stroke, and may release a latent capacity to learn and recall for people with amnesia and some sorts of dementia.


A 2014 study on patients with amnesia showed that a ten-minute rest in a quiet darkened room boosted recall from 14 to 49 per cent. The study also found similar results for healthy participants boosting
memory recall from ten to 30 per cent.


power-of-cultivating-silence.jpg
Embrace the power of silence through meditation shutterstock/fizkes

 

4. Relieves stress
Stress can disrupt the natural processes of your body, but taking a break and embracing the power of silence can lower blood cortisol level and adrenaline and relieve stress.


• JOIN US! Sign up today and make new friends at happiness.com •

 

In fact, silence is more relaxing than listening to meditative music and just two minutes of silence improves blood circulation and reduces blood pressure to ease tension from the body and brain.
Furthermore, when you’re not stressed, your natural biological mechanisms can heal and repair your body.

 

5. Awakens awareness
Silence is not only the absence of sound and speech, it is also refers to the quietening of your ‘monkey mind’ – the relentless stream of evaluative thoughts and emotions that plague our minds.
When you learn to quieten your mind with mindfulness and meditation, you will notice a distinct shift in your awareness and sensitivity to the environment around you. 

 

6. Improves heart health
Interestingly, moments of silence can also benefit your heart. The American Heart Association says that taking some time out to practise meditation and mindfulness can do wonders for heart health as it lowers blood pressure, reduces stress, and thus lowers the overall risk for heart disease.

 

CONNECT_300X250_EN.gif

 

7. Improves clarity
Taking a moment to breathe, calm your inner mind and get away from noise has the potential to regulate your breath, and do away with stress which you may not even be aware of. When you are not distracted by 
noise, your brain returns to its default mode and integrates internal and external information “into a conscious workspace,” promoting mental clarity.

 

8. Boost cognitive resources
According to Attention Restoration Theory, spending more time in an environment that is restorative, rather than one which has high sensory input, restores the brain’s cognitive resources.

 

“Embracing the power of silence does not have to be about the absence of sound, but also about getting away from distracting noises that stimulate your brain and trigger a stress response.”

That is why when you take a walk in nature away from urban areas, your stress levels reduce and you feel happier afterwards. A low sensory environment provides the solitude and silence you need, which helps
clear your mind, reduce mental fatigue and internal noise, and helps you to rejuvenate and relax.

 

9. Better decision-making
When you're in a noisy environment, it becomes difficult to make any decisions, as your brain is constantly being bombarded with stimuli. 


But just five minutes of silence not only reduces the stress response of the amygdala but it also releases serotonin, endorphins and oxytocin — known as happy hormones. This restores your well-being and your
mind becomes calmer. With that, you can make better decisions as you process information with clarity and awareness.

 

10. Enhances creativity
Solitude and periods of silence allows your mind to wander, which is essential for 'incubation' – one of the four stages of creativity where you let go of what you're working on or thinking of.


• JOIN US! Sign up today and make new friends at happiness.com •

 

Studies show that during incubation, even though you're not thinking of any particular thing, there are unconscious processes taking place in the brain, searching for a solution. And it is during this stage 
that you come up with creative solutions. Daydreaming, taking a walk in nature and good sleep are all wonderful sources for incubation, thus boosting your creative potential.

 

Ways you can enjoy the power of silence
Clearly, science shows that silence gives our mind and body a break from the noise of the modern world and brings with it many powerful benefits. So, how can you embrace silence in your life? What can you do
to find solitude and instill it into your daily practice?

 

Walk in nature
Take a walk in nature for some peace and solitude. Find a park, a walking trail, or go to the woods or the beach to enjoy some time alone, and take in the beautiful sounds of nature, which can help you relax.
 

Meditation
There is plenty of evidence of the benefits of meditation, inner peace included. Meditation does not have to be complicated: all you need is five to ten minutes to sit in silence and focus on your breath: 
gently let go of any thoughts from your awareness.
 

Sacred pauses 
Sacred pauses are mini-meditations you take during the day when you are involved in a goal-oriented task. Take a break from what you are doing and sit comfortably with your eyes closed. Take a few deep breaths
and with each breath let go of any thought or worries and let your body relax. You can do this many times a day to give your mind and body a break from noise and stressful thoughts.
 

Stay in bed an extra five minutes in the morning
Wake up early to enjoy the quiet and solitude before the day begins. Bask in the silence, with no particular thoughts as you awaken slowly to the day. These precious moments can set the mood for the rest of
the day and give you the boost you need to carry on with a peaceful vibe.
 

Digital Detox
Set a day, perhaps on the weekend, to stay away from your digital devices. Although it may sound like an impossible task, keeping away from digital stimulation will help you center yourself and give you the
time to attain inner quiet.
 

Practise yoga
Yoga gives you the opportunity to shift your focus from your thoughts to the poses you are practising. And as you move from one pose to the other, your mind settles down with every breath that you take.
Yoga is known to make you feel calmer as it releases happy hormones, relieving stress and anxiety. 
 

The takeaway: the power of silence
The World Health Organization has called noise pollution ‘a modern plague.’  And rightly so. Many studies and experts have warned us about the harm that excessive noise causes not only to our health and
mental well-being but also to the health of this planet.


Not to mention the disruption caused by the noise that goes on in our minds as we stumble through a busy life. Cultivating silence then becomes imperative: there is a power in silence that results in multiple 
body and mind benefits.


CONNECT_300X250_EN.gif

 

Embracing the power of silence does not have to be about the absence of sound, but also about getting away from distracting noises that stimulate your brain and trigger a stress response.


Depending on where you you live and your lifestyle, you may find it hard to escape from noise at all. But you can always cultivate a habit to find a few moments of powerful silence and calm in your day.
And, as you do so, you should notice a world of difference to your health and well-being. •

Main image: shutterstock/Vitalii Bashkatov
 
